[Music]
as we clamour back onto the main track
we walk straight into them out in the
open
world
[Music]
my first close encounter and it's with
the man himself
routina whoa whoa slow down slow down to
the way way way down
and if we're on the trail stay on the
edge if they see us in the open
they're a lot more nervous if you move
really fast they'll run away
okay so we just go slowly now
rouchina is the boss and
he's the daddy to three bundles of black
fur
called chooch happy and thursday
they play while he keeps watch
oh he's just surrounded by his family
this is just
a perfect introduction to him
so let's meet some of the clan in
addition to chooch
thursday and happy the smallest and the
wooliest members of the group
[Music]
there's also some older juveniles who
haven't left home yet
and here's one of rochino's six females
wives if you like
all gathered together in a happy picnic
atmosphere
while the precious babies are at the
heart of the family
hanging out on the sidelines are several
black backs
teenage males that are apt to cause
trouble
like baby chooch's 15 year old brother
marembo
he's the one in front of roccino here a
large confident black back
he greets recino with respect but is
still keen to strut his stuff
his main rival is another black back
fourteen-year-old beezer
who although smaller has got bags of
attitude
there's definite tension between these
two
looks like marembo is itching for a
fight and charges towards beater
visas having none of it and sees him off
these young males are pretenders to
racino's throne and
pumping with testosterone piezo's
especially hot blooded
and martha doesn't want to encourage
contact with us
this is a troublemaker
[Music]
um move back
he's escorting tinder a pregnant female
and martha gives gorilla grunts to calm
him as he passes
meanwhile the kids play on completely
carefree
they know their daddy is close by
the silverback is the ultimate protector
of the group
and everything about rouchina's powerful
presence
underlines that fact
wow
that was him telling us
with the way now clear little chooch
jumps onto his mom's back
and they follow regina back into the
forest
but no one has carried out this
experiment with growers guerrillas
in the wild will they see this
and run a mile will they see this and
want to investigate it what will they
make of it that's what i want to find
out
i've disinfected everything to ensure
there's no health risk to the gorillas
and the mirror is perspex so it can't
shatter if handled
okay
there's a cluster of gorillas down there
and it may well be that might come up
this slope so i'm just gonna
see if i can install the tank there
the mirror quickly attract the attention
of two young gorillas
oh gosh straight away one of the
juveniles has come
straight up to not a worry in the world
[Music]
some animals are surprised when they see
their own reflection and react
aggressively
so it's interesting to see that these
gorillas are so calm
and inquisitive
there's absolutely no fear and this will
be the
very very first time that any of these
girls
have actually looked into a mirror seen
a proper reflection of themselves
[Music]
all right he's homeless herself there
they're more interested in how it feels
rather than
how it looks
it really shows how gentle they are it's
not like they've
seen this thing and they want to rip it
apart and break it
just exploring really delicately
smelling it
touching it looking into it
there's no indication that these
juveniles are making the connection
between themselves
and the image in the mirror even human
children take a while to recognize their
own reflection
so maybe it's just a matter of time
baby muhira is intrigued
[Music]
so
okay it looks like moira was interested
but munger wasn't letting him play with
a new thing in the forest
play time's over
it's been fascinating but i suspect it
would take a lot more exposure to the
mirror
before the gorillas show signs of
self-recognition
you've got parked vehicles coming
through you've got
trucks loaded up with charcoal and
that's why chimanuka is just
so tense about crossing the road if it
was just him he could find him
so he's just waiting nervously for a
quiet time to cross with his whole
family
i feel for him
after 20 minutes we take matters into
our own hands
and lambert stops the traffic
look at this oh my gosh
now there you go that's confidence for
you
with chimanuka in charge the orphan
morale
is confident enough to venture out
oh fantastic
oh my gosh look at this the whole
family muhira and his mother are almost
the last ones to break cover
and scamper over absolute confidence
luke
with all the youngsters across safely
chimanuka
can stop being the lollipop man
the boss showing
us that despite there's a road running
through
this is still his jungle
i love it
it's a great relief to see the whole
family across the road in safety
this area is more densely forested than
the sections we've been in before
it's criss-crossed with guerrilla trails
so there are clearly other families
around
and muguruka's arrival just adds to the
numbers
here he comes oh my word
right down onto the road
amazing he didn't even i thought maybe
stop being a bit reluctant
but because he came meters from me
to see him out in the open like this you
see how big he is
amazing
there's little doubt that silverback
ranu would love to claim his hard-earned
right to the female in his group
but at 37 years old tuck is most
definitely
not interested in sex nearly all females
stop
by their mid to late 30s
unfortunately ranu doesn't know this
and keeps trying to impress her with his
displays of strength
but all this seems to do is make tut
more determined to ignore him
so
as ranu continues to harm tuck her sons
come to her defense
now the smallest guerrilla in the group
decides to show the mighty silverback
ranu who's in charge
wow
this is hardly the great leader in
control
pushed around by the youngest male in
the group and spurned by tuck the only
female
things couldn't get much worse
with muguruka close on his tail
chamanuka
keeps the family moving and it becomes
more and more difficult to keep track of
them
i've given the rangers a camera to make
sure that we don't miss anything
having circled each other for some time
chimanuka
and mugaruka are now meters apart
this is a clear threat to chimanuka and
his family
[Music]
[Applause]
ah
it looks like chimanuka has seen off
mugaruka
but at what cost
the family have scattered
chimanuka has been injured and it'll be
some time before the full repercussions
become apparent
i won't see my gorilla family for
another couple of months
will chimanuka be overthrown and lose
everything
the fate of orphan murali baby muera
and the whole family hangs in the
[Music]
balance
[Applause]
[Music]
you